---
title: Grafana
description: Guide for time series data visualization with QuestDB and Grafana
---

[Grafana](https://grafana.com/) is a popular observability and monitoring
application used to visualize data and help with time series data analysis. It
has an extensive ecosystem of widgets and plugins. QuestDB supports connecting
to Grafana via the [Postgres](/docs/reference/api/postgres) endpoint.

## Prerequisites

- [Grafana](https://grafana.com/grafana/download) should be installed and
  running.
- QuestDB should be installed and running via
  [Docker](/docs/get-started/docker/)

## Configure database

To avoid unnecessary memory usage, it is recommended to disable QuestDB's `SELECT`
query cache by setting the property `pg.select.cache.enabled=false` in your
`server.conf`. This is because Grafana does not use prepared statements when
sending the queries and the query cache becomes much less efficient.

## Add a data source

1. Open Grafana's UI (by default available at `http://localhost:3000`)
2. Go to the `Configuration` section and click on `Data sources`
3. Click `Add data source`
4. Choose the `PostgreSQL` plugin and configure it with the following settings:

```bash
host: localhost:8812
database: qdb
user: admin
password: quest
SSL mode: disable
```

5. When adding a panel, use the "text edit mode" by clicking the pencil icon and
   adding a query

## Global variables

Use
[global variables](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/variables/variable-types/global-variables/#global-variables)
to simplify queries with dynamic elements such as date range filters.

### `$__timeFilter(timestamp)`

This variable allows filtering results by sending a start-time and end-time to
QuestDB. This expression evaluates to:

```questdb-sql
timestamp BETWEEN
    '2018-02-01T00:00:00Z' AND '2018-02-28T23:59:59Z'
```

### `$__interval`

This variable calculates a dynamic interval based on the time range applied to
the dashboard. By using this function, the sampling interval changes
automatically as the user zooms in and out of the panel.

## Example query

```questdb-sql
SELECT
  pickup_datetime AS time,
  avg(trip_distance) AS distance
FROM taxi_trips
WHERE $__timeFilter(pickup_datetime)
SAMPLE BY $__interval;
```

## Known issues

For alert queries generated by certain Grafana versions, the macro
`$__timeFilter(timestamp)` produces timestamps with nanosecond precision, while
the expected precision is millisecond precision. As a result, the alert queries
are not compatible with QuestDB and lead to an `Invalid date` error. To resolve
this, we recommend the following workaround:

```questdb-sql
SELECT
  pickup_datetime AS time,
  avg(trip_distance) AS distance
FROM taxi_trips
WHERE pickup_datetime BETWEEN cast($__unixEpochFrom()*1000000L as timestamp) and cast($__unixEpochTo()*1000000L as timestamp)

```

See [Grafana issues](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/issues/51611) for more
information.

## See also

- [Build a monitoring dashboard with QuestDB and Grafana](/blog/2020/10/19/grafana-tutorial/)
